(aggressive guitar music)
In episode six, we talked about grid auto-flow,
where if we, let's open this one up here,
when you have more items than can fit in the grid,
by default, it'll just wrap on to the next line
and create you another implicit row.
However you can switch grid auto-flow to column,
meaning that, when we run out of room in our grid,
it will just add additional implicit columns,
instead of adding additional rows.
Now, I hinted at a third option,
which is grid auto-flow dense.
So we're gonna look at how that works right now.
So open up Dense and Dense Start.
We've got 70 items here and we'll make a grid
of 10 equal items.
We'll say grid template columns, GTC, repeat 10, 1FR.
Yeah, so we've got our 10 items across.
Now, I want to make just a bunch of them different sizes
so that we're gonna end up with some irregularities.
Then we're going to select every sixth one
and just make a bunch of 'em, uh,
different sizes, be able to span.
We'll say item, nth child, every sixth one,
we're going to say background, cornflowerblue,
that's nice and then, we will say grid column, span six.
Okay, here's what's happening.
Let's understand why we're getting these gaps
and what we can do about fixing them.
The way that the browser lays out your grid is it takes the,
all of the different spots that we have,
and we've got 10 across here, and it takes the first item,
says, "Okay, can I fit it?"
Yeah.
"Can I fit it?"
It keeps going and then it gets to this sixth one
and we know that it's going to take six spots,
in order to fit this into our grid.
However, we only have five spots left.
What happens?
Well, it just breaks onto the next row
and it will continue, uh, adding that item.
The downside is that it doesn't fill in these spots without,
with the extra ones that could fit.
Like, seven, eight, nine and 10 could easily fit
themselves up here.
So what we can actually do with that is,
if we go back to our grid and we say, grid auto-flow dense,
what's gonna happen, and give it a save, ooh, very nice,
is it will then do one, two, three, four, five
and then it will hit six and say, "Can't fit it."
Let's go, uh, let's go onto the next line
and we can fit it there, good.
Then it gets to seven and then it goes back to the start
and says, "Hey, is there any spots
"where I could just sorta wiggle this one in?
"Or maybe just fit it in?"
And it says, "Yeah, of course.
"You can fit it in here."
Then there's seven, eight, nine, 10, 11
and then we hit 12 and, at this point,
we're aware of where of the 13 is and of course,
it's not gonna fit, so that will go onto the next line.
Then once we hit 13, it's gonna go back
to the first available, uh, grid column or grid row that
we have and see if it can fit it in, so that's pretty neat.
Let's, let's actually take that off, just for a second,
and go ahead and make some bigger ones here.
We'll say, item, nth child, every 8N,
we're going to make the background, uh...
Ooh, tomato, delicious, and we will make them span two.
Grid, column, span two, good.
Then let's take, then let's go and do one more selector
and do some rows.
So say every 9N, we'll say grid row span two
and that will just make a bunch of the random ones.
Good.
Now we have all of these different spaces available
to us and it would be really nice if they would
sort of just fit them in where as possible.
If you do not care about what your, uh, order actually looks
like in CSS grid, you can turn this dense back on
and then it will just try and fit all
of the different values that you want.
Same thing will go as if, like, for example, this 18 here,
let's go to .item18 and give it a background of...
Green yellow and, oh, that's not gonna work
because nth child is more specific.
Let's do some dirty, dirty deeds here.
DIV?
Oh, no, not DIV!
How does CSS even work?
You know what?
Screw it.
Beautiful, okay.
We can move this item to the end.
We say, grid column end, negative one,
so it'll anchor it, bah, at the end.
Again, again, we're gonna need anything important there
and that will anchor it over at the end.
CSS will always lay out the ones that need to go
in a specific spot first and then it will say,
"Okay, we'll I'm dense."
As I start to auto-lay out the rest of the items,
I will then look for a spot that I can,
sort of, squeak it into.
In this case, it's actually working out
really nicely for us.
There is no extra spots, but, um, it's not the perfect
masonry that you might think it will be, every now and then.
That's just because sometimes you will have holes,
um, because there just is not a specific shape
for what you have.
So we're gonna do an example with a photo gallery coming up,
where I sort of show how you can, sort of, like,
load it with lots of these little ones.
In this case, I've loaded it with lots of these little,
um, or these little yellow ones that are just one spot
by one spot and they can fit, really, anywhere.
We're gonna do that with our photo gallery one as well.
Grid auto-flow dense is really nice.
When you don't have it, you got lots of holes.
When you do turn it on,
everything fits nicely, interchanged.
(aggressive music)